---
output: "pdf_document"
editor_options:
  chunk_output_type: console
urlcolor: blue
fontsize: 12pt
header-includes:
- \usepackage{caption}
- \captionsetup[figure]{labelformat=empty}
---

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(
  comment = "#",
  cache = FALSE,
  collapse = TRUE,
  error = TRUE,
  tidy.opts=list(width.cutoff=65)
)
```

Mountain Pine Beetle Problem  
Authors: Rachel Koerner and Josh Job Joseph

Abstract
Presented with the problem of Mountain Pine Beetles and the dangerous effects 
that their corresponding Dissolved Oxygen Content levels produce followed by 
learning the dangerous solutions of tree thinning and pesticide application, we 
wanted to explore if there were any revelations in the corresponding data set 
that could suggest a safer solution to this problem. Ultimately, our goal was to 
process the relationships between this response variable (DOC) and the other 
predictors in our given data set through exploratory analysis so that we could 
forge a linear model for the Dissolved Oxygen Content level.  From the dataset 
given, we knew that the Dissolved Oxygen Content level would be the response 
variable of our analysis. The over 30 remaining variables in the dataset would 
thus be our predictors. Given this, we deducted that we could perform variable 
selection on the predictors to help prioritize significant factors and eliminate 
potentially irrelevant factors. Doing this, the predictor of elevation mean was 
determined as most significant. Relating this elevation mean to DOC levels 
revealed a decidedly negative trend. With both Mountain Pine Beetles and their 
current solutions being so dangerous, isolating the factor of elevation and 
targeting the solution to just areas of significant elevation would address the 
beetle issue while also limiting the amount of thinning and pesticide, 
ultimately resulting in the least dangerous solution for all involved.

Introduction
From the Southwest of the United States all the way up to the Western side of 
Canada, the Mountain Pine Beetle infects the tree bark of pines. The infection 
of the bark then causes them to have the color of their pine needles to become 
red, and then those needles fall off the tree, thus killing the tree. This is 
already harmful to the environment, but decomposing needles cause more issues 
than killing trees. The decaying needles then end up in the water supply via 
some form of precipitation. During the last phase of water purification, 
chlorine is added to the water supply, and when chlorine and dissolved organic 
carbon combine, the result is carcinogenic by-products. Carcinogens are 
extremely harmful given they cause cancer in living organisms, so it is 
within our best interest to figure out if there are factors that correlate to 
the mean dissolved organic carbon, and if there is, then how may the factors 
contribute to a solution to the problem at hand.

Methods
Several predictive models were made to gain information about what variables are 
influence mean DOC. The first step was to split the data into test and train 
data with a 50/50 split. The test and train data each had random rows of data 
assigned to them to prevent the models from being overtrained/skewed. Next step 
was to remove the columns “Year” and “New Location ID”. When making 
multi-variable models, it is imperative that the independent variables 
correlate to the dependent variable (mean DOC). “Year” would correlate with most 
independent variables; hence it needs to be removed to prevent the models from 
being skewed. “New Location ID” was removed because unnecessary variables create 
additional noise, which could distort the model by overpowering other more 
important variables. The predictive models that were created were: Backwards 
model (BIC variant), Forwards model, Linear model trained on elevation, and a 
Lasso model. All data was trained on train data and predictions were made based 
on the test data. The models were then plotted on top of test data to verify 
that the models were made properly and to check if they resembled the test data.
     


Results
By using the modeling methods discussed (backwards, forwards, and lasso), we 
accumulated a list of significant coefficients according to each model. 
Elevation mean was the factor that was deemed significant by each of these 
models. The factor of “wasteWaterPointSources_count” was another factor deemed 
significant by each, but “elevation_mean” acquired the higher significance than 
this. With elevation mean as our designated factor, we used this to produce the 
linear model discussed earlier as well. Each of these four methods (backwards, 
forwards, lasso, and linear), all produced decently accurate models according to 
our plots based on training and test data. It was because of this accuracy that 
we knew we could rely on the result they produced in pronouncing the 
of elevation mean.

  Having further verified the reliability of our conclusion, a 
simple linear model was made to identify the correlation between DOC and the 
elevation mean itself. The result was an evidently negative trend suggesting 
that DOC increases as elevation decreases. On first glance, this could suggest 
that the problem is the elevation. That is, if DOC is high at low elevations, 
why not just address the Mountain Pine Beetle Problem at low elevations. 
This perspective fails to include the whole context though.

 Further observation would reveal two horizontally linear accumulation of points 
within the plot, one around the elevation mean 2600 and the other around 1800. 
These two elements of the graph suggest the presence of accumulation of water 
(where DOC is measured), revealing the presence of large bodies of water. This 
observation leads to the understanding that the reason the DOC is increasing as 
elevation lowers is because the DOC content from various elevations 
accumulating as they flow towards lower elevations with paths of runoff water 
and other bodies of water. The relationship with DOC is not then inclusively 
due to elevation but also to the accumulation of DOC at all previous 
elevations.

  This conclusion is further supported by the high density of observations at 
high elevations simply because there are so much of them. The more sparse 
observations at lower observations confirm the “bodies of water” theory that 
such DOC accumulates in large bodies rather than sporadically dispersing at 
lower elevations.
By now understanding the correspondence with elevation, more efficient solution 
can be applied to the Mountain Pine Beetle Problem.

Discussion
The conventional solutions pertaining to mean DOC issues are thinning and 
spraying. Thinning requires the bark of the pine trees to be thinned a certain 
amount and at a certain time to not negatively impact the health of the tree. 
Spraying involves the use of pesticides, which is harmful to the environment. 
By using the fact that elevation is a key factor, the use of thinning and 
spraying can be limited to be as cost-effective and as environmentally friendly 
as possible. The usage of thinning and spraying will be best utilized at higher 
altitudes to prevent mean DOC from traveling down into bigger bodies of water.

